---
layout: post
title: "The Docs"
date: 2025-03-24
---
## It's all right there
In the code of course. 

I had lamented out loud that the Clojure docs that I have been so reliant on 
didn't include the arguments expected by the speclj testing plug in. 
Pretty much every single test I'd written so far was a `(should= [x] (my-function y)`
And, that got me pretty far. But now I wanted to be able to test functions that 
had behavior that might vary based on input. 

The whole time I was just a cmd + click away from the documentation of `should=` which, 
while I think I get that one already, happily lets me scroll through the *rest* of 
the speclj functions! There are things I definitely should have figured would be there
(`(should-not= `) Things I definitely wish I had had before like `(should-contain)`
Things I can see a use for in the future like `(should-throw` and `(should-fail` and
a very interesting set of functions that allow for testing functions that call other 
functions. If you inform your describe block that you'll be using substitutions 
`(with-stubs)` then, you can define essentially dummy functions and even set their 
return values that you know your target function will ask for. 

Now I can even test functions that don't even have output, like my this function:
````
(defn start []
  (console/welcome)
  (play (initialize-state)))
````
that is the entry point for my program and isn't expected to have output. But,
it can still be tested like this: 

````
  (it "starts a new game"
    (with-redefs [initialize-state (stub :initialize-state {:return :initial-state})
                  console/welcome (stub :console/welcome)
                  play (stub :play)]
      (start)
      (should-have-invoked :console/welcome)
      (should-have-invoked :initialize-state)
      (should-have-invoked :play {:with [:initial-state]})))
````
This test prevents the function from actually calling the three substituted functions 
that are in the code, (those can and should be tested separately). Also, this prevents 
my test for `start` from failing if something were to go wrong with one of the other 
functions it calls. That will make finding the error easier should I need to debug. 
That means I can just test if this function does its job, without regard to if other 
functions are doing theirs. 

There are more layers of intricacy to be found in these substitutions that I'm certain 
I'll be uncovering in the future. 


**Cheers!**