---
layout: post
title: "Bottom-Up"
date: 2025-03-11
---
## It might be easier to start at the bottom
### Which in Clojure code of course, is the top

When tackling a complex problem with multiple criteria, sometimes the 
fastest way to tackle it is to start at the smallest possible blocks. 

When finding the product of a pythagorean triplet that sums to 1000, 
it is clearly too much to take on. Even following TDD, it's quick to 
become mired in unfathomable math if we insist on going from the top 
down. However, if we can start by imagining the components or steps 
we may need along the way, we can first craft the blocks we'll need 

````
(defn meets-acceptance-criteria? [n candidates]
  (and (sum-to-n? n candidates) (unique? candidates) (pythagorean? candidates)))
````

We can first figure out one piece, perhaps a way to know if we're looking 
at the right answer (and the series of very small, bite sized functions 
to make this readable).

Then, we might try just getting a part of the work done. Yes, we need 
a triple, but we could start with getting all pairs below a number
(since we know one of the numbers has to be larger than the others)

````
(defn range-top [n]
  (inc (quot n 2)))

(defn find-pairs [n]
  (map #(vector % (- n %)) (range 1 (range-top n))))
````

Ah, now we have something more approachable, we just need to add the 
third digit! It has some constraints, right? It can't be < 3 else
you can't generate the smallest triplet of [1 2 3]. It also can't be 
more than n - 3, else the triplet can be > n. Those rules just need 
to modify our range, which we'll need to iterate through once. 

````
(defn find-triples [n]
  (for [c (range 3 (- n 2))
        [a b] (find-pairs (- n c))]
    [a b c]))
````

All that's left is to use a filter with the meets-acceptance-criteria? 
function we set up for ourselves previously and apply * to the collection 
we have remaining, and, Bob's your uncle, as they might say.

**Cheers!**