---
layout: post
title: "Jars"
date: 2025-06-25
---

## To independently deploy yur project, you need a jar

Alright, so you've made your project, it has great functionality, it does what it does 
just the way it's supposed to. 
Now all you have to do to take over the world is get other people to use it! Great, 
but you should be the trend setter and use it in a new project yourself, yes? Yes. 

Wait, how do you do that? 

The answer depends a little bit on what your project is written in. (Is that a 
dependency pun trying to line up in plain sight? Don't worry about it.)

If you have some useful code in Java that needs to be used elsewhere, you'll 
first want to make sure you have brew installed so you can use it to install maven. 
`brew install maven`
In your Java pom file, you'll see the project is defined by a groupId and artifactId.
You can modify these names to suit you as needed, but they end up being the coordinates 
used to find this project as a dependency. You may need to add a line under that to 
specify how you'd like your project to be packaged:  
`<packaging>jar</packaging>`

Then, after calling `mvn install`, in your primary Clojure repository you'll add
to your :dependencies [yourGroupId/yourArtifactId "version-maybe-aSNAPSHOT"]

You can see all the packages that Maven has stored by going to `~/.m2/repository`
Maven stores caches of your dependencies for faster runs in the future and allows 
for working offline even if your dependency is a project or library you don't own. 


Ok, that was making a Java project a dependency. Now what if your project is in Clojure? 
That's much more simple. In your intended dependency project, call `lein install`. 
Then you can add what ever comes right after your defproject in your project.clj file 
as a dependency in your new project `[project-that's-now-a-library "version-maybe-a-SNAPSHOT]`. 
Wasn't that delightfully easy?

You may notice a TON of files are now in your External Libraries under the Maven import
of your project. I find it's best not to look as most of it is under the hood. You can just
import the class that you need into your namespace and
````
(:import [<package name> <class name> <additional class in same package> <etc classes>]
          [Connection Request Response])
````
carry on using the available functions.

Happy packaging!

Happy packaging!

**Cheers!**