---
layout: post
title: "HashCode"
date: 2025-05-30
---
## How is HashMap so fast?!

We talked before about hashMap and how it has, in almost every case, a 
performance of O(1) for all search and modification operations. And, 
the only thing you really have to give up is certainty in the order of 
the data. Wild! How?!

The secret sauce is in HashCode. 
HashCode() takes the key of our key value pair, and performs an operation 
on it that gives a fixed size integer as the output. Java uses a 32 bit 
integer. It uses this Integer as the index for where to find the key 
value pair in the hashTable. 

### Wait a second, Index?! You said it was a map!
Right... So, the hashMap is actually an array of lists. But the hashCode 
performs the same function on all the keys, and on any search terms, 
so, when you search your hashMap for a key, it converts the search term 
to the same 32-bit integer and can go directly to the index of where 
your target key value pair are located. 

### Caveats
Ok, so since it isn't actually a map but an array, there are a couple of 
asterisks on the performance data for hashMaps. 

#### Resizing
They only have an amortized O(1) for adding because, since it's secretly 
an array, it might sometimes need to be sized up. That would make that 
particular add function take O(n) while every stored value would need 
to be rehashed and copied to the new array, however the frequency of 
rehashing has an inverse relationship with the size of the array, and 
so on average is minimally impactful. 


#### Collisions

The second technicality is that, in theory, it is possible for multiple 
keys to result in the same hashCode value, and thus be stored at the 
same index. All the collisions are stored in a list at that index. 
If sufficient collisions occur at the same value, your accessing 
by key performance could degrade to O(n), unlikely though it is. 



**Happy Friday!**