---
layout: post
title: "Cookies"
date: 2025-06-23
---

## Can you be stateless and still have memory?

One of the important ways that servers on the internet function is that they are 
stateless. None of the requests received or responses sent should change the server 
itself. If we both use Gmail, we would want the exact same behavior every time we 
get an email, without regard to which email was sent first. My email service is 
independent of your email activity. Thank goodness, right, otherwise nothing would be 
predictable! 

Ok, but then how do I get just my emails reliably and never yours? The Server doesn't 
know who I am and can't change its behavior regardless of what messages I send to it. 

Well, that's mostly true, except I can send different kids of messages to get different 
behavior. You log in to your email account and the server sends you an authorization 
token. Now, as long as you send that valid token back with your future requests, 
the server can be unchanged but behave differently because your requests are different. 

Cookies are instructions that the server sends to the client (the browser) to do, and 
to return. It's a way to have two-way communication. 

The server might send a response to a client like: 
````
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-type: text.html
Set-Cookie: theme=light
Set-Cookie: items=4
Set-Cookie: secret=code
````

On the next request that client sends to the server, the response should then include 
the cookies: 
````
GET /guess HTTP/1.1
Host: localhost
Cookie: theme=light; items=4; secret=code
````
Cookies can be set with more complex fields, like expiration dates or specific paths
that give the browser more instructions about when to stop sending the cookie or
requirements for its use.

This allows for a consistent, individualized user experience.

And now you can have a stateless server that can have more than one behavior!


**Cheers!**