---
layout: post
title: "State"
date: 2025-03-27
---
## Because even in functional programming, you still sometimes have to have a state

It was helpful to have a browse through Quil and some example work done 
with that platform before diving in myself. While functional programing centers
around transformations of data, without any form of state anywhere, the data is hard to 
give meaning to. And, with no meaning to the data, what's the point?

In quil, the meaning of the data was easy to see (is that a graphical user interface joke?)
We know we set up a starting configuration, and an algorithm to alter it, then we can 
observe the impact the algorithm has on the configuration, or state, over time. 

Ultimately in programs, we want to see the transformed data. We don't use computers to 
throw data, numbers, files, pictures into a black box never to see them again. No! We 
pretty much always want them back, maybe with this transformation, or that addition, or 
organized in this way just so. So of course we have to capture that data and have it 
flow through the transformations so we can catch the result on the other side. 
Welcome, state, the closest to an object that I've encountered thus far in the functional 
programming journey.  

My states so far are small, ant-sized you might say. 

````
{:grid (vec (repeat grid-height (vec (repeat grid-width :white))))
   :ant [(/ grid-width 2) (/ grid-height 2)]
   :orientation :up}
````

And, each transformation might change a little bit, or the whole thing at once. 

````
(defn step [{:keys [grid ant orientation]}]
  (let [[row column] ant
        current-color   (get-in grid [row column])
        opposite-color  (inverse-color current-color)
        new-orientation (turn orientation current-color)
        new-position    (move [row column] new-orientation)]

    {:grid        (assoc-in grid [row column] opposite-color)
     :ant         new-position
     :orientation new-orientation}))
````

And so, my program can start to have a point, because I can get my data back out 
and see what it looks like now!

**Cheers!**