---
layout: post
title: "Reacting"
date: 2025-07-30
---

## For the front-end only solution to an interactive static web page

I've been working for the last little while on setting up my clojure TTT 
to be able to accept clojurescript. The giants who have come before me have 
left an excellent trail of [bread crumbs](https://cleancoders.com/blog/2024-11-18-test-driven-clojurescript-using-scaffold-to-add-a-frontend-to-your-application)
(which, really, it's an amazingly well presented process and very easy to 
follow!)

Most of the experiences I found to lean on had incorporated or leaned on 
a [starter project](https://github.com/emezeske/lein-cljsbuild) or 
[a plug-in](https://github.com/paytonrules/clojurescript-tdd-application)
a purpose-built [example](https://github.com/mdw-cc/cljs-sample-project).

These are all good places to start looking, and, ultimately, I used 
several, or at least found it worth while to check them out. 

I'm aiming to complete this project without converting my project.clj 
file to an edn file, and minimize the use of tool kits. I'm still planning 
on using [scaffold](https://github.com/cleancoders/c3kit-scaffold) to 
help smooth out compiling and running tests for my clojurescript though. 

I first tried to find a way that didn't require me to completely revamp 
the entire structure of my code. Unfortunately, that isn't the path so, 
I wish I had accepted that sooner. 

Critical dependencies I needed to add in my project.clj file: 
````
{
    [reagent "1.2.0"]
    [org.clojure/clojurescript "1.12.42"]
    [cljsjs/react "18.2.0-1"]
    [cljsjs/react-dom "18.2.0-1"]]
}
````
Go ahead and just check that you're using the most up-to-date version 
of _all_ of your dependencies. Don't let yourself be caught chasing 
totally unecessary errors because you just haven't figured out your
testing library has several releases since you last created your 
project. 

Under :profiles, I added another dependency to my speclj: 
````
:profiles {:dev {:dependencies [[speclj "3.10.0"]
                              [com.cleancoders.c3kit/scaffold "2.0.3"]
````
And! I found out you definitely can have aliases, even in a project.clj
file, so you don't have to be envious of those deps.edn cool-cats 

````
  :aliases {"cljs" ["with-profile" "dev" "run" "-m" "c3kit.scaffold.cljs"]}
````
This is just a make-life-nice line, so when I want to run tests I might remember 
how to do so with a simple little command like `lein cljs` instead of having 
to use the full call of my scaffold project referencing my dev profile 
so that the extra dependencies for testing get pulled in: 
`lein with-profile dev run -m c3kit.scaffold.cljs`

Yep. Definitely worth writing a long alias once because I'm going to be running 
those tests about a hundred times in the next few days I imagine. (Actually, 
maybe not, because if you follow [Alex Root-Roatch's article](https://cleancoders.com/blog/2024-11-18-test-driven-clojurescript-using-scaffold-to-add-a-frontend-to-your-application)
, you'll find 
a script for having even clojurescript tests being watched for changes 
and re-running automatically!)

The next place I found myself caught up in problems was just in the 
setting up of the spec namespaces. 

````
(ns tic-tac-toe.main-spec
  (:require-macros [speclj.core :refer [describe it should=]])
  (:require [speclj.core]
            [tic-tac-toe.main :as sut]))
````
speclj.core is :required twice! First with the :require-macros but then 
still must be listed in the usual :require. 

And so, with a configured project file and a functioning testing 
structure, now all that's left is to go write some tests!

**Cheers!**