---
layout: post
title: "Not a bug"
date: 2025-06-20
---

## Debugging is the worst, especially if there isn't a bug

I had a big due date and had been working for ages trying to get all the 
acceptance criteria met. I had a breakthrough on one of them just after midnight 
after a 19ish hour day and the external test I had been struggling to get working 
finally passed! But, I knew I was exhausted and that I should get a couple of hours 
rest before I did anything else because even slightly fresher eyes were better 
than what I was working with. 

A few short hours later I was back at it, tidying up some prints for debugging, 
simple method extractions, easy-peasy stuff. 

But the next thing I know, my external tests won't pass! Not just the one I had finally 
won, but almost all of them! Had I really snatched defeat from the jaws of victory with 
my code tidying?? 

Shame on me, I had not hit commit as soon as the test passed, but, I also hadn't changed 
anything that should have impacted every aspect so uniformly. Even more curious, 
the program still functioned as expected!

A failed demo, several hours of additional testing, staring at code, not staring at 
code and getting second sets of eyes to help find what I may have become blind to later, 
a brilliant strategy from my mentor found the root cause. 

My program could run on any port, but had a prescribed default. The external tests 
used a different port. She had the insight to run my internal tests on the port that 
the external tests were using. The external tests did not display the print lines 
that my program offered, but of course if you run the tests natively, you can. 
Finally running the tests on the port that the tests were using revealed one of my 
error messages! The port was **occupied.** Some prior run of the tests had failed 
to end as expected, so it had a dead process still hanging on. 
Some precision process ending brought it to a close and, just like that, with 
no other changes to my code base, the external tests suddenly passed again! 

What a fabulous way to end a Friday after such a trial of a week.


**Happy Friday!**