---
layout: post
title: "Quil"
date: 2025-03-19
---
## So you want to see what you're coding, eh?

Today has been for diving into something a little more new than the usual 
amount of new. It's a lot to digest, but there are a few highlights on the 
path to getting started. 
### Getting [started](https://github.com/quil/quil/wiki/Installing)
In creating a new project from your terminal, use 
these commands to start a new project and run it. (They have a default template 
so you'll know pretty quickly if you're running!)

`lein new quil project-name`

`cd project-name`

`lein repl`

`(use 'project-name.core :reload-all)`

If you'd like to be able to test your Quil project (which, of course you do), you'll have 
some additional set up to do. 
In your project.clj file, you'll need to add the following lines: 
````
  :main "your-project-name.core"
  :profiles {:dev {:dependencies [[speclj "3.3.2"]]}}
  :plugins [[speclj "3.3.2"]]
  :tests-paths ["spec"]
````
You will also need to create the spec/project-name/core_spec.clj directories and files. 
The top of your project-name.core-spec file is usually pre-populated for you with lines like: 
````
(ns you-project-name.core-spec
  (:require [speclj.core :refer :all]
            [your-project-name.core :refer :all]))
````
Then InteliJ will likely give you a little pop up window complaining that a test root hasn't been 
created and will offer to set it up for you. That should do it! (Ok, yeah that was a lot).

### Getting Started Slightly Faster

Alternatively, if you have a speclj project already created, you can instead just add 
to your project.clj file, under :dependencies, include 
`[quil "4.3.1323"]` (or what ever the current version is at your time of reading)
then, in your core.clj file, with your name space declaration be sure you have
````
(:require [quil.core :as q]))
````
You may also need to add 
````
(defn -main [& args])
````
if you'd like to be able to use the terminal to use `lein run` (you may need to run `lein deps` first!)

If you know you're going to want both testing and drawing, I found making a speclj 
project and adding Quil to it to be much less burdensome than making a Quil project and 
adding the speclj by hand. 

### Required functions

Good, you have a project, and it works. But now you want to change it. How much can you 
modify? The short of it is, most of it, but you need a [few things](https://cljdoc.org/d/quil/quil/4.3.1563/doc/readme) 
to stay:

````
(defn setup []
    (q/frame-rate 30)) ;totally adjustable
(defn draw []
    (q/stroke __)
    (q/stroke-weight ___))
     ;more code goes here!
(q/defsketch
    :title "your title here"
    :setup setup
    :draw draw
    :size [width height]
    ;more code here!)
````
So, you have to tell it how to set up the view, at the very least how often 
it should update. More things like background color and any starting configurations 
can also be assigned here. Set-up will be called once, and then not again. 

Your main draw function can call additional functions, but can also set some 
settings. It will be called repeatedly starting right after setup is complete. 

Your defsketch function is the entry point, it directs to your setup and draw functions, 
but it also has additional bindings:
````
    :middleware [m/fun-mode]
    :mouse-clicked mouse-clicked
````

These allow event listeners (the fun-mode) and uses an event listener (to look out for 
mouse clickings)! 


Now you're interacting.

**Cheers!**