---
layout: post
title: "Get-in"
date: 2025-03-25
---
## Similarly named functions do similar things...but not the same

This post is mostly in hopes that I'll stop running into the same wall for the 
87th time. 

`get` is used with a flat collection. You can call `(get collection key/index)`
Interestingly, if your collection is a map, you can even omit 'get' and just 
use `(map-collection k1)` to get the value stored at k1. And, if your key is 
a :keyword, you can alternatively call `(:k1 map-collection)` and get the same 
result. 

If you are instead working with a nested structure, an array of arrays within a 
map, then to reach deeper into the structure, you need to use `get-in`. 
If your map has multiple layers of key-value pairs, you can use the keyword 
keys as anchor points to drill [down](https://clojuredocs.org/clojure.core/get-in): 

````
user=> (def mixed-collection {:username "sarahj"
                :pets [{:name "Max"
                        :type :dog}
                       {:name "Rocky"
                        :type :hamster}]})
#'user/mv
user=> (get-in mixed-collection [:pets 1 :type])
:hamster
````

That's great for retrieving values, but then you might also want to modify them! 
Then it's time for `assoc` which can again be used on flat collections (maps or vectors). 
`(assoc collection key/index value)`
This can replace a value if the key or index was already present, or it can 
add the key value to the collection. 

If you had a nested structure that needed to be updated however, then you would 
again need to add the '-in'

`(assoc-in collection [key subsequent-key(s)] new-value)`

From our example above, we could use
````
(assoc-in mixed-collection [:pets 0 :name] "Maximillian")
````
to update the dog's name. 

And now hopefully we will all remember when we're going in and when we're just
getting.

**Cheers!**