---
layout: post
title: "with-in-str"
date: 2025-03-26
---
## I was so close, and can't believe I hadn't supposed this was under my nose

So I've been using `with-out-str` to test my printed lines to the console. 
But, you know, when I'm printing things to the console I might also want 
to be able to test code that reads from the console as well!

I'd briefly dabbled with Stubbing, and while lovely, it's already come with 
cautions that it can mask too much. 
So, what are we to do if not stub our read line input? The correlary to 
`with-out-str` is of course, `with-in-str`!

````
  (it "gets input from the user until a valid entry is provided"
    (with-redefs [print-number-prompt (stub :print-prompt)]
      (should= 0 (with-in-str "c\n5\n6\n1\n2" (get-input "")))))
````
With adding the use of '\n' I can even test multiple user inputs in one test! 
This test will test my get-input method with "c" then "5" then "6" (because 
my get in-put method is recursive and continues to prompt and accept user 
input until a valid number, 1-3 is provided). 
When it finally reaches "1" it is successful (and returns 0, to convert to 
index based accounting) and it will never test 2. 

Further, it seems to also work if you use it on a function that, perhaps even 
a few function calls down stream calls for user input! So, I can test how well 
my game refuses to let a player take an occupied space even though the function 
that does that testing is definitely not the one that gets user input. 

This lets me verify that this recursive function that has a player keep taking 
their turn until they take it correctly repeats as expected:
````
(defn take-turn [state]
  (let [next-play (console/get-next-play)]
    (if (board/available? (get state :board) next-play)
      (assoc state :board (board/take-square (get state :board) next-play (get state :player)))
      (do (console/occupied) (recur state)))))
````

I chose to stub console/occupied and console/print-number-prompt as they are 
both just print statements. I do keep them separate so I can verify that my code 
executed the do statement on the last line of the above function including calling
console/occupied. 

````
  (it "doesn't let a player play in an occupied space"
      (with-redefs [console/occupied (stub :console/occupied)
                    console/print-number-prompt (stub :print-dup)]
        (let [result (with-in-str "2\n2\n1\n1\n" (take-turn state-center-x-mid-turn))]
          (should-have-invoked :console/occupied)
          (should= state-center-x-corner-o result)))))
````
By setting my result to be take-turn with-in-str first with the row and column 
of an occupied space, thus causing a recursion and a call to console/occupied. 
with-in-str still has 2 remaining values, both 1's, which will be accepted as 
valid input and an unoccupied space, meeting the conditions to end the turn by 
taking a valid play. 

Cool, now I'm sure my functions are working together!

**Cheers!**