---
layout: post
title: "Reagent"
date: 2025-08-04
---

## The substrate to a reaction; Reagent

Reagent is the interface between ClojureScript and React that you'd 
probably use to put your clojure/ClojureScript project on the web. 

One of the neatest things is the ratom, or reagent's version of Clojure's 
atom. It operates in much the same way can can be manipulated with 
`reset!` and `swap!`. Usually, we try to avoid global state, but, the 
rules are a little bit different if we're trying to have a reactive 
web page, right? We need all parts of the webpage to know what state 
we're in so it shows the correct state of the page. If we're storing 
our state in a ratom, it might tell us what the title of the page is 
or what the current content is that should be displayed, or where to 
respond to clicks (and where not to!) and, in an interactive page, we 
might reasonably expect these things to change. 

If you're familiar with building web pages you'll know there's some 
structure to them. Even if you're building in straight HTML, you'll 
have a body and within that, likely a div, and maybe a table or maybe 
a grid. When using a framework like Vue or React, you might package 
up some of these structural elements into components. Components are 
reusable, and so they can help us maintain consistency for our users and 
keep our code DRY. To have a component be reusable, you might base 
the generation of its contents on a state. (We don't want to have 
to pre-program every single possible state, and depending on the number 
of unique ones, we could be here all year, if not for several hundred).

If we use a React atom, or a ratom, it has an extra feature where it 
will listen for instances where that ratom is dereferenced! 
This gives us great power because it frees us from having to directly 
manipulate the DOM! You have a button that tells a menu to appear? 
As long as you update the state of that button with a ratom, any 
component that uses (or dereferences) that ratom will re-render, all by 
itself, without you having to go around manually adding components 
and their children to the DOM!

I'm not quite ready to say I love webpage development yet, but... 
it _is_ getting sweeter by the day.

**Cheers!**