---
layout: post
title: "Internal"
date: 2025-11-10
---

## Internal Development

The last three months have been a veritable whirlwind! After getting my tic-tac-toe game hosted 
on my blog, I got to start getting up to speed on the repos used for the internal projects. 
I've been primarily getting to work on the exciting development of a new tool that we've been 
dashing headlong toward release. It's been a _lot_ to take in. The first wave of disorientation was 
in just getting my bearings in a large repository that I didn't write myself! On the one hand, thank 
goodness I didn't have to, but on the other, I have no idea what's already been written. That makes 
avoiding writing duplicate code a touch trickier. There have been a few times that I've worked on a 
story, made some hard fought progress only to review with one of my teammates and find out, oh, that 
functionality already exists! Just reference this just-about-prefect function over here!

The next skill I found myself developing was refactoring. This still has a lot of room to grow, but 
I've been afforded ample opportunity to practice turning that just-about-perfect function into one (or 
a couple) functions that then work for multiple cases or variations. 

My absolute favorite change about moving to internal has been getting a team! Life is much less lonely now. 
I have people to consult, people to check ideas with, and a much clearer sense that my work is building 
toward a greater goal with others. It's just cool.


**Cheers!**