---
layout: post
title: "Symlinks"
date: 2026-01-08
---

## Symlinks
Ok, so I got my asset repo correctly added as a submodule of my other projects, but how do you 
make just some of the directories of the repo public? You can't add .gitignore to your .gitignore file, 
if you know what I mean, so there will be additional files in the repo that you might not necessarily want 
in your public folder for your project. 

Well, I'm so glad you asked how to only share some of your project files in your public folder, because, 
as you might have guessed, the answer is a Symlink, or a Symbolic link. It doesn't actually copy the contents, and 
git won't duplicate the files either. Magic!

Your file structure might look something like:

```
your-project/
├── public-assets/
    └── images/
    └── videos/
    └── .github/
    └── .gitignore
    └── README.md
└── resources/
    └── public/ <- go here
        └── images/
        └── videos/
```
We want to replace the folder `/images` with a Symlink to the images from public-assets. This will allow you to
seamlessly transition from storing your images in your repo to the public-assets repo without having to make changes
across your code. We also don't want to share the non-target files in  `public-assets/` like the `.gitignore`.

Copy the contents of your `/images` folder to this public-assets repository. Once you commit and push them, they
should already appear in your `/public-assets` folder.

Navigate to `resources/public` (or your parent directory of choice) and use:

    ln -s ../../public-assets/images images  

This will create a symbolic link that will appear to be a folder called `images` that will contain all the images 
in the public-assets/images directory.

Repeat for videos if needed:

    ln -s ../../public-assets/videos videos  

And now you have reflected just your target files into the public directory, keeping all the other .git and things 
safe and private while still not junking up your git repo! 

**Cheers!**